THE MOST BASIC
FINANCIAL IMPULSE OF ALL
IS TO SAVE FOR A RAINY DAY,
BECAUSE, AS WEVE BEEN
PAINFULLY REMINDED
BY THE RECENT MONTHS
OF FINANCIAL TURMOIL,
THE FUTURE IS SO UNPREDICTABLE.
THE WORLD REALLY CAN
BE A DANGEROUS PLACE.
NOT MANY OF US GET THROUGH LIFE
WITHOUT A LITTLE BAD LUCK.
SOME OF US GET A LOT.
ITS ALL ABOUT BEING
IN THE WRONG PLACE
AT THE WRONG TIME,
LIKE NEW ORLEANS WHEN
HURRICANE KATRINA HIT.
THE QUESTION IS,
HOW SHOULD WE DEAL
WITH THE RISKS
AND UNCERTAINTIES OF THE FUTURE?
SHOULD THE ONUS BE
ON THE INDIVIDUAL
TO ENSURE AGAINST DISASTER?
SHOULD WE BE ABLE TO RELY
ON THE VOLUNTARY CHARITY
OF OUR FELLOW HUMAN BEINGS
WHEN CALAMITY STRIKES?
OR SHOULD WE BE ABLE
TO COUNT ON THE STATE--
IN OTHER WORDS, THE
COMPULSORY CONTRIBUTIONS
OF OUR FELLOW TAXPAYERS--
TO BAIL US OUT WHEN
THE FLOOD COMES?
[THUNDER RUMBLES]
THATS A LONG WAY OF
ASKING A SIMPLE QUESTION.
ARE YOU INSURED?
WE BRITISH CERTAINLY
THINK WE ARE.
TODAY WE PAY A LARGER PROPORTION
OF OUR INCOME ON INSURANCE
THAN ANY OTHER
PEOPLE IN THE WORLD.
BECAUSE BRITAIN IS ONE OF THE
SAFEST COUNTRIES ON EARTH.
THE STRUGGLE TO OVERCOME RISK
HAS BEEN A CONSTANT THEME
OF THE HISTORY OF MONEY,
FROM THE INVENTION
OF LIFE INSURANCE
BY 2 HARD-DRINKING
SCOTS CLERGYMEN
TO THE RISE AND FALL
OF THE WELFARE STATE
TO THE EXPLOSIVE GROWTH
OF HEDGE FUNDS AND THEIR
MULTI-BILLIONAIRE OWNERS.
AT THE CORE OF OUR
STRUGGLE WITH RISK
IS AN INSOLUBLE CONFLICT.
WE WANT TO BE
FINANCIALLY SECURE,
AND SO WE YEARN FOR
A PREDICTABLE WORLD.
BUT THE FUTURE ALWAYS
SEEMS TO COME UP WITH NEW
AND UNPLEASANT WAYS TO
TAKE US BY SURPRISE.
WE WANT CALCULABLE RISK.
WERE STUCK WITH
RANDOM UNCERTAINTY.
Man: 15 MINUTES!
[MEN YELL]
Announcer: FUNDING FOR
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
MY IDEA WILL BRING RENEWABLE
ENERGY TO EVERYONE.
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.
AND BY...
[MEN YELLING]
Man: 15 MINUTES.
Ferguson: WHEN HURRICANE
KATRINA HIT NEW ORLEANS
IN THE LAST WEEK
OF AUGUST 2005,
IT CAUSED DEATH AND DESTRUCTION.
YET, ITS NOT A
NATURAL CATASTROPHE
THAT NOW THREATENS THE
SURVIVAL OF THE CITY.
THE REAL LESSON OF THE
DISASTER IS ABOUT MONEY,
HOW THE RISK MANAGEMENT
SYSTEM WE CALL INSURANCE
SIMPLY FAILED WHEN FACED WITH
A CALAMITY ON THIS SCALE.
THE HURRICANE DIDNT HIT
NEW ORLEANS DIRECTLY.
THE MAIN FORCE OF THE STORM
PASSED TO THE
NORTHEAST OF THE CITY.
BUT JUST AS THE RESIDENTS
BREATHED A SIGH OF RELIEF,
THE REAL CATASTROPHE BEGAN.
THIS INDUSTRIAL CANAL
LINKS LAKE PONTCHARTRAIN
TO THE MISSISSIPPI, AND
AFTER THE HURRICANE,
THE HUGE STORM SURGE
RAISED THE WATER LEVEL
IN THE CANAL SO HIGH
THAT IT BROKE THE LEVEE,
POURING UMPTEEN GALLONS
OF THE LAKE OVER HERE
INTO THE NINTH WARD
OF NEW ORLEANS.
JUST TO THE EAST
OF THE NINTH WARD
A BLUE-COLLAR COMMUNITY
OF HOMEOWNERS,
ALL--ON PAPER, AT LEAST--
COVERED BY PRIVATE INSURANCE.
COUNCILOR JOEY DIFATTA
REFUSED ADVICE TO
LEAVE THE CITY,
STAYING PUT DURING THE STORM.
EVENTUALLY HE WAS FORCED
TO RETREAT TO THE
ROOF OF THE TOWN HALL
AS THE WATERS KEPT RISING.
...COMPLEX, AND
AS YOU CAN SEE,
THIS IS THE WATER LINE...
THATS THE WATER LINE.
THATS WHERE IT CAME UP TO.
THE WATER CAME
IN THIS BUILDING,
AND 14 FEET OF
WATER IN 15 MINUTES.
WOW.
FROM THE SECOND FLOOR
OF THIS BUILDING,
I COULD SEE, COMING
DOWN JUDGE PEREZ,
A WALL OF WATER.
IN THAT WALL OF
WATER WAS DEBRIS--
CARS, VEHICLES,
PIECES OF ROOFS--
AND THIS WALL OF WATER,--
YOU KNOW, YOU GUESSTIMATE--
HAD TO BE MAYBE 15
TO 20 FEET TALL.
AND MOVING FAST. MOVING QUICKLY.
JUST COMING DOWN
THIS BOULEVARD STREET
AND JUST TAKING EVERYTHING
WITH IT AS IT WOULD COME.
THE WHOLE OF ST. BERNARD PARISH
WAS INUNDATED IN
JUST 15 MINUTES.
ONLY 5 HOUSES OUT OF
26,000 WERENT FLOODED.
MORE THAN 2,000 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED IN HURRICANE KATRINA
AND THE SUBSEQUENT FLOODING.
HERE IN ST. BERNARD PARISH,
148 PEOPLE LOST THEIR LIVES,
MOSTLY BECAUSE THEY BECAME
TRAPPED IN THEIR HOUSES
AS THE FLOOD WATERS ROSE.
THE PAINTED SIGNS ON
THESE ABANDONED HOUSES
SAY WHETHER DEAD
BODIES WERE FOUND
AFTER THE FLOOD
WATERS RECEDED,
A LITTLE BIT LIKE
MEDIEVAL LONDON
IN THE TIME OF PLAGUE.
YET, 3 YEARS LATER, ITS
NOT FLOODING OR PLAGUE
THATS KILLING NEW ORLEANS.
A HARSH FINANCIAL
REALITY HAS EMERGED.
PEOPLE CANT LIVE HERE ANYMORE
BECAUSE THEY CANT
INSURE THEIR HOMES.
ONE MAN MADE IT HIS MISSION
TO SHOW THE LIMITS
OF PRIVATE INSURANCE
WHEN IT COMES TO A
REALLY BIG CRISIS.
HES FORMER NAVY PILOT
RICHARD F. SCRUGGS,
ONE OF THOSE LAWYERS THAT ONLY
AMERICA SEEMS TO PRODUCE.
DICKIE SCRUGGS TOOK $50 MILLION
OFF THE ASBESTOS INDUSTRY,
THEN $248 BILLION
OFF TOBACCO COMPANIES
FOR FAILING TO WARN SMOKERS
OF THE DANGER OF LUNG CANCER.
THIS KIND OF WORK
HAS ITS REWARDS.
SCRUGGS SHARE IN FEES
ON THE TOBACCO CASE
WAS $1.4 BILLION.
SCRUGGS LATEST TARGET HAS BEEN
AMERICAS INSURANCE COMPANIES.
HIS CLIENTS, HUNDREDS
OF HOMEOWNERS
WHOSE HOUSES WERE
DESTROYED BY KATRINA,
ARGUED THAT THE COMPANIES
WERE REFUSING TO PAY UP
ON GENUINE CLAIMS,
A VIEW THE INSURERS DISPUTED.
THERE WAS A HOUSE THERE?
THERE WAS A HOUSE HERE
AND A HOUSE NEXT TO IT
WHERE YOU SEE THE TRAILER.
SCRUGGS HAD A DOG OF
HIS OWN IN THIS FIGHT.
HIS OWN HOME ON PASCAGOULAS
BEACH BOULEVARD
HERE ON THE MISSISSIPPI COAST
WAS SO BADLY DAMAGED BY KATRINA
THAT IT HAD TO BE DEMOLISHED.
THIS IS THE... THE FRONT DOOR?
THIS IS THE FRONT
DOOR RIGHT HERE,
THE EDGE OF THE
SLAB, IF YOU WILL.
YOU WERE SLABBED...
IF YOU COULD FIX THE SYSTEM...
BUT I HAVE THE MEANS--
IM FORTUNATE ENOUGH THAT
I HAVE THE MEANS TO...
TO LOSE A HOUSE AND BUILD IT.
...TO LOSE A HOUSE
AND BUILD IT BACK.
MOST PEOPLE HERE DONT.
IF YOU HAD THE POWER
TO CHANGE THE SYSTEM
SO THAT PEOPLE REALLY WERE
INSURED, HOW WOULD YOU DO THAT?
IS THERE A WAY OF MAKING
INSURANCE WORK AGAIN?
THERE IS, AND ITS DISCLOSURE
OF WHAT YOURE BUYING,
SO THAT YOU KNOW-- LIKE A DRUG.
THERES A BLACK BOX
WARNING ON THERE.
THIS IS WHAT IT DOES.
THIS IS WHAT YOU
SHOULD WATCH OUT FOR.
AS OPPOSED TO THIS DEVICE
WHICH IS CALLED THE
MODERN INSURANCE POLICY,
WHICH NO ONE CAN
INTERPRET OR UNDERSTAND.
IT SEEMED AS IF THE
INSURANCE COMPANIES
HAD BEEN WELL AND
TRULY SCRUGGED.
ONE OF AMERICAS BIGGEST INSURERS
SETTLED HUNDREDS OF
CASES BROUGHT BY SCRUGGS
ON BEHALF OF CLIENTS WHOSE
CLAIMS HAD BEEN TURNED DOWN.
BUT IN THIS BITTER
HIGH-STAKES BATTLE,
THE INSURANCE COMPANIES
HAD THE LAST LAUGH.
AFTER WINNING THE CASE,
SCRUGGS WAS CONVICTED
AND SENTENCED TO 5 YEARS
FOR ATTEMPTING TO BRIBE A JUDGE
AND INFLUENCE THE
DISTRIBUTION OF LEGAL FEES.
AND THE BIG INSURANCE COMPANIES
RESPONDED TO THE WEIGHT
OF POST-KATRINA CLAIMS
BY IN EFFECT DECLARING
PARTS OF THE GULF COAST
A NO-HOME-INSURANCE ZONE.
TODAY, AS COUNCILOR JOEY
DIFATTA HAS FOUND OUT,
INSURING A HOUSE IN
THIS PART OF NEW ORLEANS
IS VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE.
THEY CANT GET A
MORTGAGE, EITHER.
THAT IS CORRECT. THEY
HAVE TO MAKE A CHOICE.
DO I BUILD A HOUSE HERE, OR
DO I RELOCATE TO ANOTHER AREA
WHERE INSURANCE MAY BE A LITTLE
BIT CHEAPER AND I CAN AFFORD IT?
SO THAT IS HURTING
OUR COMMUNITY.
ITS TAKING OUR PEOPLE AWAY--
THE NUCLEUS OF THIS PARISH--
AND PULLING THEM AWAY.
THREE YEARS AFTER
DISASTER STRUCK,
ST. BERNARD PARISH HAS ONLY 1/3
OF ITS PRE-KATRINA POPULATION.
[THUNDER RUMBLES]
OF COURSE, LIFE HAS
ALWAYS BEEN DANGEROUS.
THE REAL LESSON OF KATRINA
OR ANY BIG DISASTER
IS THAT EVEN WHEN WE THINK
WERE PROTECTED AGAINST RISK,
SOMETIMES IT TURNS OUT WERE NOT.
EVEN MAKING QUITE
MODEST INSURANCE CLAIMS
CAN SEEM MORE TROUBLE
THAN ITS WORTH.
IT LEAVES YOU WONDERING WHY
WE BOTHER SPENDING SO MUCH
ON INSURANCE
POLICIES EVERY YEAR.
WHERE DID THIS STRANGE
HABIT COME FROM?
SAVING UP FOR THE
PROVERBIAL RAINY DAY
IS THE FIRST PRINCIPLE
OF INSURANCE,
BUT THE TRICK IS KNOWING WHAT
TO DO WITH YOUR SAVINGS,
SO THAT, UNLIKE IN NEW
ORLEANS AFTER KATRINA,
THEYRE THERE IN THE KITTY
WHEN YOU REALLY NEED THEM.
BUT TO DO THAT, YOU NEED TO
BE MORE THAN USUALLY CANNY,
AND THAT GIVES US
A VALUABLE CLUE
AS TO WHERE THE HISTORY
OF MODERN INSURANCE
HAS ITS ORIGINS.
WHERE ELSE BUT IN
BONNY, CANNY SCOTLAND?
[BELLS CHIMING]
THEY SAY THE SCOTS ARE
A PESSIMISTIC PEOPLE.
MAYBE ITS THE WEATHER, ALL
THOSE HUNDREDS OF RAINY DAYS.
MAYBE ITS THE ENDLESS YEARS
OF SPORTING DISAPPOINTMENT.
OR MAYBE IT WAS THE
CALVINISM WE PICKED UP
AT THE TIME OF THE REFORMATION.
CERTAINLY, ITS 2 CHURCH
OF SCOTLAND MINISTERS
WHO DESERVE THE CREDIT
FOR INVENTING THE FIRST TRUE
INSURANCE FUND BACK IN 1744
AND FATHERING A
MULTI-BILLION-POUND INDUSTRY.
THE COURTYARD OF GREYFRIARS
IS BEST KNOWN FOR
THE GRAVE ROBBERS,
THE RESURRECTION
MEN WHO CAME HERE
IN THE LATE 18th CENTURY
TO SUPPLY THE MEDICAL SCHOOL
AT EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY
WITH CORPSES FOR DISSECTION.
BUT GREYFRIARS LASTING
IMPORTANCE COMES
FROM THE WORK OF THE MINISTER
HERE, ROBERT WALLACE,
AND HIS FRIEND,
ALEXANDER WEBSTER.
ITS SOMEHOW APPROPRIATE THAT
IT WAS SCOTTISH MINISTERS
WHO INVENTED MODERN INSURANCE.
AFTER ALL, WE TEND
TO THINK OF THEM
AS THE EMBODIMENT OF
PRUDENCE AND THRIFT
WEIGHED DOWN WITH
AN ANTICIPATION
OF IMPENDING DIVINE RETRIBUTION
FOR EVERY TINY TRANSGRESSION.
BUT IN FACT, ROBERT
WALLACE WAS A HARD DRINKER
AS WELL AS A
MATHEMATICAL PRODIGY
WHO LIKED NOTHING BETTER THAN
KNOCKING BACK MAGNUMS OF CLARET
WITH HIS BIBULOUS BUDDIES.
WALLACE AND WEBSTER
WERE UNHAPPY AT THE WAY
THE WIDOWS AND CHILDREN
OF THEIR FELLOW CLERGYMEN
WERE TREATED WHEN THE
GRIM REAPER STRUCK.
THEY OFTEN FOUND THEMSELVES
HOMELESS AND PENNILESS.
THE PLAN WALLACE AND WEBSTER
CAME UP WITH WAS INGENIOUS--
THE FIRST TRUE INSURANCE
FUND IN HISTORY.
THESE ARE SOME OF THE
VOLUMINOUS CALCULATIONS
NOW HOUSED AT THE NATIONAL
ARCHIVES OF SCOTLAND,
AND YOU CAN SEE HOW HE RAN THE
NUMBERS OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
MAKING VERY CAREFUL ASSUMPTIONS
ABOUT THE MAXIMUM NUMBER
OF WIDOWS AND ORPHANS THAT
WOULD HAVE TO BE PROVIDED FOR.
THE KEY POINT, HOWEVER,
WAS THAT FROM NOW ON,
MINISTERS WOULDNT
JUST PAY MONEY IN
THAT WOULD BE PAID OUT WHEN
ONE OF THEIR NUMBER DIED.
RATHER, THEY
WOULD PAY PREMIUMS
THAT WOULD BE USED
TO CREATE A FUND,
AND THE FUND WOULD
THEN BE INVESTED FOR
PROFITABLE PURPOSES.
THE WIDOWS AND ORPHANS
HENCEFORTH WOULD BE PAID
OUT OF THE RETURNS
ON THAT MONEY,
LEAVING THE PREMIUMS
TO ACCUMULATE.
ALL THAT WAS REQUIRED
FOR THE SCHEME TO WORK
WAS AN ACCURATE PROJECTION OF
HOW MANY WIDOWS AND ORPHANS
THERE WOULD LIKELY
BE IN THE FUTURE,
A CALCULATION WHICH
WALLACE AND WEBSTER MADE
WITH EXTRAORDINARY PRECISION.
THE CREATION OF THE SCOTTISH
MINISTERS WIDOWS FUND
WAS A MILESTONE IN
FINANCIAL HISTORY,
FOR IT PROVIDED A MODEL NOT
JUST FOR SCOTTISH CLERGYMEN
BUT FOR EVERYONE WHO ASPIRED
TO PROVIDE FOR LIFES
EVENTUALITIES.
BY 1815, THE
PRINCIPLE OF INSURANCE
WAS SUFFICIENTLY WIDESPREAD
TO BE ADOPTED FOR
THE WIDOWS OF MEN
WHO LOST THEIR LIVES
FIGHTING AGAINST NAPOLEON.
AT THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO,
YOUR CHANCES OF GETTING KILLED
WERE UP TO 1 IN 4,
BUT AT LEAST IF YOUD
TAKEN OUT INSURANCE,
THAT YOUR WIFE AND
CHILDREN WOULDNT BE THROWN
OUT ONTO THE STREET.
GIVE A WHOLE NEW MEANING TO
THE PHRASE, TAKE COVER.
THE SCOTTISH MINISTERS FUND GREW
INTO THE WORLD-FAMOUS
SCOTTISH WIDOWS.
EVEN NOVELISTS, NOT RENOWNED
FOR THEIR FINANCIAL PRUDENCE,
COULD JOIN.
WALTER SCOTT TOOK
OUT A POLICY IN 1826
TO REASSURE HIS CREDITORS
THAT THEYD BE PAID IN
THE EVENT OF HIS DEATH.
BY THE MID-19th
CENTURY, BEING INSURED
WAS AS MUCH A BADGE
OF RESPECTABILITY
AS GOING TO CHURCH ON SUNDAY.
WHAT NO ONE ANTICIPATED
BACK IN 1744
WAS THAT THE CAREFUL
CALCULATIONS OF
2 SCOTTISH MINISTERS
WOULD GROW INTO TODAYS
HUGE INSURANCE INDUSTRY.
AS ROBERT WALLACE
UNDERSTOOD 250 YEARS AGO,
SIZE MATTERS IN INSURANCE,
BECAUSE THE MORE PEOPLE
ARE PAYING INTO A FUND,
THE EASIER IT BECOMES,
BY THE LAW OF AVERAGES,
TO PREDICT HOW MUCH WILL HAVE
TO BE PAID OUT EACH YEAR.
ALTHOUGH NO INDIVIDUALS DATE OF
DEATH CAN BE KNOWN IN ADVANCE,
ACTUARIES CAN CALCULATE
THE LIKELY LIFE EXPECTANCY
OF A LARGE GROUP OF INDIVIDUALS
WITH QUITE ASTONISHING
PRECISION.
INSURANCE IS ALL
ABOUT TRYING TO COPE
WITH THE RISKS OF THE FUTURE,
IF, THAT IS, YOURE INSURED
IN THE FIRST PLACE.
NO MATTER HOW MANY PRIVATE FUNDS
LIKE SCOTTISH
WIDOWS WERE SET UP,
THERE WERE ALWAYS
GOING TO BE PEOPLE
BEYOND THE REACH OF INSURANCE
WHO WERE EITHER TOO
POOR OR TOO FECKLESS
TO SAVE FOR THAT RAINY DAY.
THE LOT OF THE POOR WAS
ONCE A PRETTY HARSH ONE--
EITHER DEPENDENCE
ON PRIVATE CHARITY
OR THE HARSH REGIME
OF THE WORKHOUSE,
LIKE THIS TYPICALLY
AUSTERE ONE HERE
IN THE HEART OF EDINBURGH.
YET, BY THE 1880s,
PEOPLE BEGAN TO FEEL
THAT LIFES LOSERS
SOMEHOW DESERVED BETTER.
THE SEED WAS PLANTED
OF AN ENTIRELY NEW
APPROACH TO RISK,
A SEED THAT WOULD
ULTIMATELY SPROUT
INTO THE MODERN WELFARE STATE.
THIS STATE SYSTEM OF INSURANCE
WAS DESIGNED TO EXPLOIT THE
ULTIMATE ECONOMY OF SCALE
BY COVERING LITERALLY
EVERY CITIZEN
FROM THE CRADLE TO THE GRAVE.
YET, WHILE WE TEND TO
THINK OF THE WELFARE STATE
IN FACT, THE WORLDS FIRST
WELFARE SUPERPOWER WAS JAPAN.
DISASTER JUST KEPT
STRIKING JAPAN
IN THE FIRST HALF
OF THE 20th CENTURY.
IN 1923,
A HUGE EARTHQUAKE
DEVASTATED TOKYO.
AS IN NEW ORLEANS,
MANY PRIVATE INSURANCE POLICIES
TURNED OUT TO BE WORTH
LITTLE MORE THAN THE PAPER
THEY WERE PRINTED ON.
A NEW IDEA BEGAN TO
EMERGE IN JAPAN--
THAT THE STATE SHOULD
TAKE CARE OF RISK.
BUT THIS WAS TO BE
STATE PROTECTION
ALLIED WITH IMPERIAL AMBITION.
THE JAPANESE SET UP
A WELFARE STATE...
...AND THEY DID IT
TO PROMOTE WARFARE.
IT WAS THE MID-20th CENTURY
STATES INSATIABLE APPETITE
FOR ABLE-BODIED YOUNG
SOLDIERS AND WORKERS,
NOT SOME KIND OF
BLEEDING HEART ALTRUISM,
THAT INSPIRED THE
RISE OF WELFARE.
STATE HEALTHCARE WOULD
ENSURE A FITTER POPULACE
AND A STEADY SUPPLY OF
ABLE-BODIED RECRUITS
TO THE EMPERORS ARMED FORCES
AND DELIVER HIM AN EMPIRE.
THE WARTIME SLOGAN ALL
PEOPLE ARE SOLDIERS
WAS ADAPTED TO BECOME
ALL PEOPLE SHOULD
HAVE INSURANCE.
THE ONLY PROBLEM WAS THAT
JAPAN HAD GONE TO WAR
WITH THE WORLDS
ECONOMIC COLOSSUS,
THE UNITED STATES.
JAPANS WARFARE STATE PROVED
TO BE A MASSIVE MISTAKE.
QUITE APART FROM THE
NEARLY 3 MILLION LIVES LOST
IN JAPANS DOOMED
BID FOR EMPIRE,
BY 1945, THE VALUE OF
JAPANS ENTIRE CAPITAL STOCK
SEEMED TO HAVE BEEN REDUCED
TO ZERO BY AMERICAN BOMBERS.
CITIES BUILT LARGELY OUT
OF WOOD WERE INCINERATED.
NEARLY 1/3 OF THE
URBAN POPULATION
LOST THEIR HOMES.
PRACTICALLY THE ONLY CITY TO
SURVIVE INTACT WAS KYOTO,
THE FORMER IMPERIAL CAPITAL.
1945 MAY HAVE SEEN THE END OF
THE JAPANESE WARFARE STATE,
BUT IT WASNT THE END OF
THE JAPANESE EXPERIMENT
WITH STATE-SPONSORED WELFARE.
IN JAPAN, AS IN MOST
COMPETENT COUNTRIES,
THE LESSON WAS CLEAR.
THE WORLD WAS JUST
TOO DANGEROUS A PLACE
FOR PRIVATE INSURANCE
MARKETS TO COPE WITH.
BUT WITH THE BEST
WILL IN THE WORLD,
PEOPLE COULDNT BE EXPECTED
TO INSURE THEMSELVES
AGAINST THE U.S. AIR FORCE.
THE ANSWER PRACTICALLY
EVERYWHERE WAS THE SAME--
FOR GOVERNMENT TO STEP IN,
IN EFFECT, TO
NATIONALIZE RISK.
PERHAPS THE MOST FAMILIAR
SYSTEM OF WELFARE
FROM THE CRADLE TO THE GRAVE
ALSO BORN IN THE RUINS OF WAR
WAS DEVISED BY THE
BRITISH ECONOMIST
WILLIAM BEVERIDGE.
WHEN THE JAPANESE CAME UP WITH
THEIR OWN COMPREHENSIVE WELFARE
SYSTEM IN OCTOBER 1947,
THEIR ADVISORY COMMITTEE
ON SOCIAL SECURITY
RECOMMENDED WHAT AMOUNTED
TO BEVERIDGI NO NIHON-BAN--
BEVERIDGE FOR THE JAPANESE.
AND YET, THEY WENT EVEN FURTHER
THAN BEVERIDGE HAD INTENDED,
AS THIS COPY OF
THEIR REPORT HERE
IN THE LIBRARY OF THE JAPANESE
NATIONAL PARLIAMENT MAKES CLEAR.
IT CALLED ON THE GOVERNMENT
TO PROVIDE AGAINST
EVERY CAUSE OF POVERTY.
SICKNESS AND
INJURY, DISABILITY,
DEATH, CHILDBIRTH,
LARGE FAMILIES,
OLD AGE AND UNEMPLOYMENT.
WHATEVER THE REASON, THE
NEEDY WOULD BE GUARANTEED
THE MINIMUM STANDARD OF LIVING
BY NATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
[MONKS CHANTING]
THE JAPANESE WOULD NO LONGER
HAVE TO RELY ON THE BENEVOLENCE
OF A FEUDAL LORD OR
THE LUCK OF THE GODS.
THE WELFARE STATE
WOULD COVER THEM
AGAINST ALL THE VAGARIES
AND VICISSITUDES
OF THE MODERN WORLD.
IF THEY COULDNT
AFFORD EDUCATION,
THE STATE WOULD PAY.
IF THEY COULDNT FIND
WORK, THE STATE WOULD PAY.
IF THEY WERE TOO ILL TO
WHEN THEY RETIRED,
THE STATE WOULD PAY.
AND WHEN THEY FINALLY DIED,
THE STATE WOULD PAY
THEIR DEPENDENTS.
SO WHAT HAPPENED
AFTER THE WAR IN JAPAN
WAS MERELY THE EXTENSION OF
THE WARFARE WELFARE STATE.
THE SLOGAN NOW BECAME
ALL PEOPLE SHOULD
HAVE PENSIONS.
THE JAPANESE WELFARE STATE
SEEMED TO BE A MIRACLE
OF EFFECTIVENESS.
IN PUBLIC HEALTH AND EDUCATION,
JAPAN LED THE WORLD.
BY THE LATE 1970s, THE
JAPANESE COULD BOAST
THAT THEIR COUNTRY HAD BECOME
THE WELFARE SUPERPOWER.
RUN LIKE THIS, THE
WELFARE STATE SEEMED
TO MAKE SO MUCH SENSE.
JAPAN HAD ACHIEVED
SECURITY FOR ALL,
WHILE AT THE SAME TIME GROWING
SO RAPIDLY THAT BY 1968,
IT HAD THE SECOND LARGEST
ECONOMY IN THE WORLD.
ONE U.S. ECONOMIST
EVEN PREDICTED
THAT JAPANS PER CAPITA INCOME
WOULD OVERTAKE AMERICAS
BY THE YEAR 2000.
WELFARE WAS WORKING
WHERE WARFARE HAD FAILED
TO MAKE JAPAN TOP NATION.
THE KEY TURNED OUT TO
BE NOT A FOREIGN EMPIRE
BUT A DOMESTIC SAFETY NET.
AND YET, THERE WAS A
CATCH, A FATAL FLAW
IN THE DESIGN OF THE
POST-WAR WELFARE STATE.
JUST WHAT WAS IT THAT
CAUSED THOSE PREDICTIONS
OF JAPANS ULTIMATE TRIUMPH
TO FAIL TO COME TRUE?
THE WELFARE STATE LOOKED TO
BE WORKING SMOOTHLY ENOUGH
IN 1970s JAPAN,
BUT ELSEWHERE THERE WERE
SIGNS THAT ALL WAS NOT WELL.
IN BRITAIN AND THROUGHOUT
THE WESTERN WORLD,
THE WELFARE STATE, IT SEEMED,
HAD REMOVED THE INCENTIVES
WITHOUT WHICH A CAPITALIST
ECONOMY SIMPLY CANNOT FUNCTION--
THE CARROT OF SERIOUS
MONEY FOR THOSE WHO STRIVE,
THE STICK OF HARDSHIP
FOR THOSE WHO ARE IDLE.
THE RESULT WAS STAGFLATION--
LOW GROWTH AND HIGH INFLATION.
WHAT WAS TO BE DONE?
ONE MAN AND HIS PUPILS
THOUGHT THEY KNEW THE ANSWER.
THANKS IN LARGE MEASURE
TO THEIR INFLUENCE,
ONE OF THE GREAT ECONOMIC TRENDS
OF THE PAST 25 YEARS
HAS BEEN FOR THE WELFARE
STATE TO BE DISMANTLED,
REINTRODUCING PEOPLE
WITH A SHARP SHOCK
TO THE UNPREDICTABLE MONSTER
THEY THOUGHT THEY
HAD ESCAPED FROM...
RISK.
IN 1976, A DIMINUTIVE PROFESSOR
CALLED MILTON FRIEDMAN
WORKING HERE AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
WON THE NOBEL
PRIZE IN ECONOMICS.
MILTON FRIEDMAN WON HIS PLACE
IN THE ECONOMIC HALL OF FAME
BY RESTATING THIS
SIMPLE EQUATION...
...WHERE M IS
THE MONEY SUPPLY,
V IS THE VELOCITY
AT WHICH IT CIRCULATES,
P IS THE PRICE LEVEL
AND Q IS THE
QUANTITY OF EXPENDITURES.
FRIEDMANS OBSERVATION
WAS SIMPLE--
IF THE MONEY SUPPLY WENT UP,
THEN SO DID THE PRICE LEVEL,
HENCE THE QUANTITY
THEORY OF MONEY.
BUT YOU NEEDED MUCH MORE THAN A
PIECE OF CHALK AND A BLACKBOARD
TO ANSWER THE SECOND
CRUCIAL QUESTION
OF MILTON FRIEDMANS CAREER.
WHAT HAD GONE WRONG
WITH THE WELFARE STATE?
IN CHILE, HE FOUND
THE PERFECT LABORATORY
TO TEST HIS THEORIES.
IN SEPTEMBER 1973,
TANKS HAD ROLLED
THROUGH SANTIAGO
TO OVERTHROW THE GOVERNMENT
OF CHILES MARXIST PRESIDENT,
SALVADORE ALLENDE,
WHOSE ATTEMPT TO TURN THE
COUNTRY INTO A COMMUNIST STATE
HAD ENDED IN TOTAL
ECONOMIC CHAOS
AND A CALL BY THE
CHILEAN PARLIAMENT
FOR A MILITARY COUP.
UP THERE ON THE BALCONY
OF THE CARRERA HOTEL,
OPPONENTS OF THE ALLENDE REGIME
CELEBRATED WITH CHAMPAGNE
AS AIR FORCE JETS
FLEW OVERHEAD TO BOMB
THE MONEDA PALACE.
ALLENDE PREPARED TO MAKE
A DESPERATE LAST STAND
ARMED WITH AN AK-47
PRESENTED TO HIM
BY HIS CUBAN ROLE
MODEL, FIDEL CASTRO.
LOOKING OUT THE PALACE WINDOW
AND SEEING THE TANKS
LITERALLY ROLLING IN,
ALLENDE REALIZED
THAT IT WAS ALL OVER
FOR HIS DREAM OF
A MARXIST CHILE.
CORNERED HERE IN WHAT WAS LEFT
OF THE PRESIDENTIAL QUARTERS,
HE TOOK THE DECISION
TO SHOOT HIMSELF.
[MARCH PLAYING]
35 YEARS LATER,
YOU CAN STILL SEE
THE BULLET HOLES
IN SOME OF THE BUILDINGS
AROUND THE SQUARE.
[MAN SPEAKING CHILEAN]
WHAT HAPPENED HERE
IN SEPTEMBER 1973
IN MANY WAYS EPITOMIZED
A WORLDWIDE CRISIS
OF THE WELFARE STATE
AND POSED A STARK CHOICE
BETWEEN ALTERNATIVE
ECONOMIC SYSTEMS.
WITH OUTPUT COLLAPSING
AND INFLATION RAMPANT,
CHILES SYSTEM OF
UNIVERSAL BENEFITS
WAS EFFECTIVELY BANKRUPT.
FOR ALLENDE, THE ONLY SOLUTION
WAS FULL-BLOWN SOVIET-STYLE
TAKEOVER OF THE ENTIRE ECONOMY.
WELL, THE GENERALS
AND THEIR SUPPORTERS
KNEW THAT THEY
DIDNT WANT THAT,
BUT WHAT DID THEY ACTUALLY WANT
GIVEN THAT THE STATUS
QUO WAS UNSUSTAINABLE?
ENTER MILTON FRIEDMAN.
IN MARCH 1975, FRIEDMAN
FLEW FROM CHICAGO TO CHILE
TO ANSWER THAT QUESTION.
[MAN SPEAKING CHILEAN]
[MARCH PLAYING]
IN ADDITION TO GIVING
LECTURES AND SEMINARS,
FRIEDMAN CAME HERE
TO THE MONEDA PALACE
FOR A MEETING WITH THE
NEW CHILEAN PRESIDENT,
GENERAL AUGUSTO PINOCHET.
FRIEDMAN SPENT 3/4 OF
AN HOUR WITH PINOCHET,
URGING HIM TO REDUCE
THE GOVERNMENT DEFICIT
THAT HED IDENTIFIED
AS THE MAIN CAUSE
OF CHILES SKY-HIGH INFLATION,
THEN RUNNING AT AN
ANNUAL RATE OF 900%.
A MONTH AFTER FRIEDMANS VISIT,
THE CHILEAN JUNTA ANNOUNCED
THAT INFLATION WOULD BE STOPPED
AT ANY COST.
THE REGIME CUT GOVERNMENT
SPENDING BY 27%.
THIS PROBLEM OF INFLATION
IS NOT OF RECENT ORIGIN.
IT ARISES FROM TRENDS
TOWARDS SOCIALISM
THAT STARTED 40 YEARS AGO
AND REACHED THEIR LOGICAL
AND TERRIBLE CLIMAX
IN THE ALLENDE REGIME.
FRIEDMAN FOUND HIMSELF DENOUNCED
FOR ACTING AS A CONSULTANT
TO A MILITARY DICTATOR
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EXECUTIONS
OF MORE THAN 2,000 REAL
AND SUSPECTED COMMUNISTS
AND THE TORTURE OF
NEARLY 30,000 MORE.
CHICAGOS ROLE IN
CHILES NEW REGIME
CONSISTED OF MORE THAN JUST
A VISIT BY MILTON FRIEDMAN.
SINCE THE 1950s, THERE
HAD BEEN A STEADY STREAM
OF BRIGHT YOUNG ECONOMISTS
GOING FROM THIS PLACE,
THE CATHOLIC
UNIVERSITY IN SANTIAGO,
AND THEYD COME BACK
CONVINCED OF THE NEED
TO BALANCE THE BUDGET,
TIGHTEN THE MONEY SUPPLY,
AND LIBERALIZE TRADE.
THESE WERE THE CHICAGO BOYS,
FRIEDMANS FOOT SOLDIERS,
AND YET THE MOST
RADICAL OF THEIR IDEAS
WENT BEYOND WHAT FRIEDMAN
HAD RECOMMENDED TO PINOCHET.
IT AMOUNTED TO A
FULL-SCALE ROLLING BACK
OF THE WELFARE STATE.
THE CONSERVATIVE
ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
DIDNT BEGIN IN THATCHERS
BRITAIN OR REAGANS AMERICA,
IT BEGAN RIGHT HERE IN CHILE.
THE MASTERMIND BEHIND THIS
WHOLESALE DISMANTLING
OF THE WELFARE STATE
WAS A YOUNG ECONOMIST
CALLED JOSE PINERA.
CHILES ECONOMY WAS DESTROYED.
WE HAVE HAD 50 YEARS
OF PROTECTIONISM,
STATE INTERVENTION, AND SOME
LIGHT SOCIALISM, IF YOU WANT,
AND THEN THAT WAS EXACERBATED
DURING THE ALLENDE GOVERNMENT.
WE HAD CREATED A SORT
OF WELFARE STATE,
AND THAT, OF COURSE, WAS
GOING BANKRUPT IN CHILE.
BETWEEN 1979 AND 1981,
PINERA AND HIS COLLEAGUES
ERECTED A RADICALLY NEW
PENSION SYSTEM FOR CHILE,
GIVING EVERY WORKER THE CHANCE
TO OPT OUT OF THE OLD
PAY-AS-YOU-GO STATE SYSTEM.
INSTEAD OF A PAYROLL TAX,
EACH WORKER NOW COULD PUT
10% OF HIS WAGES ASIDE
INTO AN INDIVIDUAL PERSONAL
RETIREMENT ACCOUNT
TO BE MANAGED BY PRIVATE
COMPETING COMPANIES.
THERE WAS ALSO A SMALL PREMIUM
FOR DISABILITY AND
LIFE INSURANCE.
THE IDEA WAS TO GIVE
EACH WORKER A SENSE
THAT THE MONEY BEING PUT
ASIDE WAS HIS OWN PROPERTY,
HIS OWN CAPITAL.
[MAN SINGING IN NATIVE LANGUAGE]
PINERA GAMBLED. HE
GAVE WORKERS A CHOICE.
STICK WITH THE OLD
SYSTEM OF PAY-AS-YOU-GO
OR OPT FOR THE NEW PERSONAL
RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS.
CONVINCE BY PINERAS ARGUMENT,
80% MADE THE SWITCH
TO A PRIVATE PENSION PLAN.
BUT WAS IT WORTH IT?
WAS IT WORTH THE
HUGE MORAL COMPROMISE
THAT THE CHICAGO BOYS
AND THE HARVARD MAN MADE
WHEN THEY GOT INTO BED
WITH A TORTURING,
MURDEROUS DICTATORSHIP?
WELL, THE ANSWER
TO THAT QUESTION
VERY MUCH DEPENDS ON WHETHER
YOU THINK THEIR REFORMS
HELPED PAVE A PEACEFUL WAY BACK
TO A SUSTAINABLE
DEMOCRACY IN CHILE,
AND I THINK THEY DID.
IN 1980, PINOCHET CONCEDED
A NEW CONSTITUTION
THAT PRESCRIBED A
10-YEAR TRANSITION
BACK TO DEMOCRACY.
10 YEARS LATER, HE
STEPPED DOWN AS PRESIDENT.
DEMOCRACY WAS RESTORED.
AND BY THAT TIME, THE
ECONOMIC MIRACLE WAS UNDERWAY
THAT HELPED TO
ENSURE ITS SURVIVAL.
FOR THE PENSION REFORM
NOT ONLY CREATED
A NEW CLASS OF
PROPERTY OWNERS,
EACH WITH HIS OWN
RETIREMENT NEST EGG,
IT ALSO GAVE THE CHILEAN ECONOMY
A MASSIVE SHOT IN THE ARM.
THESE BROKERS AT
THE BANCO DE CHILE
ARE INVESTING CHILEAN WORKERS
PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS
AND THEYVE BEEN DOING A
PRETTY GOOD JOB OF IT.
AVERAGE RETURNS ON THE
PERSONAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS
HAS BEEN OVER 10%,
REFLECTING THE FACT THAT
IN THE 20 YEARS AFTER 1987,
THE CHILEAN STOCK
MARKET HAS GONE UP
BY A FACTOR OF 18.
OF COURSE, THE CHILEAN MARKETS,
LIKE ALL STOCK MARKETS,
HAS TAKEN A DIVE IN
THE LAST 2 YEARS.
AND THATS NOT THE ONLY
DOWN SIDE TO THE SYSTEM.
SINCE NOT EVERYONE IN THE
ECONOMY HAS A FULLTIME JOB,
NOT EVERYONE ENDS UP
PARTICIPATING IN THE SYSTEM.
WHICH LEAVES A SUBSTANTIAL
CHUNK OF THE POPULATION
WITH NO PENSION COVERAGE AT ALL.
IM STANDING IN FRONT OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTY HEADQUARTERS
HERE IN LA VICTORIA,
A SUBURB OF SANTIAGO
WHICH WAS ONCE OF THE
HOTBEDS OF OPPOSITION
TO THE PINOCHET REGIME.
BECAUSE MOST PEOPLE HERE
ARE EITHER UNEMPLOYED
OR WORK IN THE
INFORMAL SECTOR,
THEY DONT OR CANT PAY
INTO THE PENSION SYSTEM,
WHICH MEANS THEY DONT
GET ANYTHING OUT OF IT.
THIS IS THE KIND OF
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE CHE GUEVARA
IS STILL THE LOCAL
HERO, NOT JOSE PINERA.
THE POOR OF CHILE MAY NOT
HAVE A PRIVATE PENSION PLAN
AND MAY HAVE TO MAKE DO WITH
A MEAGER GOVERNMENT HANDOUT
IN THEIR OLD AGE,
BUT EVEN THEY HAVE BENEFITED
FROM CHILES RAPIDLY
GROWING ECONOMY.
GROWTH MAKES A DIFFERENCE IN
THE LIFE OF EVERY CITIZEN.
THE POVERTY RATE IN CHILE HAS
GONE DOWN FROM AROUND 50%
TO 13% NOW,
SO THIS HAS BEEN,
REALLY, A HUGE SUCCESS
AND THE PENSION REFORM HAS BEEN
A CRITICAL ELEMENT IN THIS.
THE IMPROVEMENT IN CHILES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
SINCE THE CHICAGO BOYS REFORMS
IS VERY HARD TO ARGUE WITH.
IN THE 15 YEARS BEFORE
MILTON FRIEDMANS VISIT,
THE GROWTH RATE HERE WAS
A MEASLY .17% A YEAR.
IN THE SUBSEQUENT 15
YEARS, IT INCREASED BY
A FACTOR OF NEARLY 20.
THE POVERTY RATE
HERE IS DOWN TO 15%
COMPARED WITH 40% IN THE
REST OF LATIN AMERICA.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK DOWN
AT SANTIAGOS SHINY NEW
FINANCIAL DISTRICT,
YOU CAN SEE WHY THE CHILEAN
PENSION REFORM HAS BEEN IMITATED
RIGHT ACROSS THE REGION AND
INDEED AROUND THE WORLD.
FOR BRITAINS
MARGARET THATCHER,
THE GENERAL FROM CHILE AND
THE PROFESSOR FROM CHICAGO
WERE HEROES WHOD DEMONSTRATED
THAT ONLY BY ROLLING
BACK THE WELFARE STATE
COULD GOVERNMENTS
REVIVE ECONOMIC GROWTH.
YET ONE COUNTRY WHERE THIS
RECIPE HAS NOT BEEN TRIED
IS THE COUNTRY THATS
COME TO NEED IT MOST.
JAPAN.
SO SUCCESSFUL WAS THE
JAPANESE WELFARE SUPERPOWER
THAT BY THE 1970s,
LIFE EXPECTANCY WAS THE
LONGEST IN THE WORLD.
THE PROBLEM WAS THAT
JAPANS WELFARE STATE
WAS TOO SUCCESSFUL.
TODAY, THE PROGRAMS RUN HERE
AT JAPANS MINISTRY OF WELFARE
RELY ON AN EVER-SMALLER
NUMBER OF ACTIVE WORKERS
TO SUPPORT AN EVER-RISING
POPULATION OF RETIREES.
BACK IN 1960, THERE
WAS SOMETHING LIKE
11 ACTIVE WORKERS
FOR EVERY ONE RETIRED PERSON.
BUT BY 2025, THAT NUMBER
COULD SINK AS LOW AS 2.
IN OTHER WORDS, THERE WILL
BE ONE OLD-AGE PENSIONER
FOR EVERY 2 BUREAUCRATS
WORKING HERE AT THE MINISTRY.
IN JUST 30 YEARS, THE COST
OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
HAS RISEN IN RELATION TO
JAPANS NATIONAL INCOME
BY A FACTOR OF 4.
TODAY, VIRTUALLY ALL JAPANS
HEALTH INSURANCE SOCIETIES
AND THE PENSION FUNDS ARE
NEARLY OUT OF MONEY, TOO.
JAPANS ONCE-SO-SUPER
WELFARE STATE
IS THREATENING TO
BANKRUPT THE NATION.
INSURANCE--IT SEEMED
SUCH A BRILLIANT IDEA
IN THE CALCULATIONS OF
THOSE SCOTTISH MINISTERS
AND EVEN MORE
BRILLIANT IN JAPANS
ALL-ENCOMPASSING WELFARE STATE.
BUT AS WEVE SEEN,
THE BEST LAID SCHEMES
CAN BE THROWN INTO DISARRAY BY
AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS.
SO IS THERE ANY BETTER
WAY OF MANAGING RISK
IN AN UNCERTAIN WORLD?
DISASTERS LIKE 9/11 AND
KATRINA EXPOSED THE LIMITS
OF BOTH TRADITIONAL INSURANCE
AND THE WELFARE STATE.
BUT INSURANCE AND WELFARE
ARENT THE ONLY WAYS
TO BUY YOURSELF PROTECTION
AGAINST FUTURE SHOCKS.
THESE DAYS, THE
SMART WAY OF DOING IT
IS BY BEING HEDGED.
NOW, EVERYBODYS
HEARD OF HEDGE FUNDS,
BUT WHAT EXACTLY
DOES HEDGING MEAN
AND WHERE DID IT COME FROM?
TO MOST OF US, HEDGE
FUNDS ARE A MYSTERY.
BUT THE ONE THING WE DO KNOW
IS THAT THEY CAN MAKE
YOU STUPENDOUSLY RICH.
ONE HUGELY SUCCESSFUL
HEDGE FUND MANAGER
PAID $60 MILLION
FOR THIS CEZANNE
AND HE OWNS THIS DEGAS, TOO.
NOT TO MENTION A JASPER JOHNS
HE PAID $80 MILLION FOR.
HES ALSO GIVEN HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO CHARITY.
KEN GRIFFIN IS THE FOUNDER OF
THE CITADEL INVESTMENT GROUP,
ONE OF THE WORLDS
BIGGEST HEDGE FUNDS.
LAST YEAR, HE NAVIGATED HIS
WAY THROUGH THE CREDIT CRUNCH
THAT HE WAS ABLE TO PAY HIMSELF
MORE THAN A BILLION DOLLARS.
TO MOST OF US, RISK IS SCARY.
BUT ALL OF GRIFFINS
VAST WEALTH HAS COME
BECAUSE HES FOUND A
WAY OF MANAGING RISK
WITH A MIXTURE OF
MATHEMATICAL PRECISION
AND BRILLIANT INTUITION.
IT COMES DOWN TO HAVING
TO MAKE A JUDGMENT CALL.
AND GOOD RISK MANAGERS
AND GOOD RISK TAKERS
ARE INDIVIDUALS
THAT HAVE A HISTORY
OF MAKING GOOD JUDGMENT CALLS
IN PRICING ASSETS OR CONTRACTS
OR DERIVATIVES IN THE
FACE OF UNCERTAINTY.
AND IS THAT JUDGMENT,
WHEN YOU MAKE IT,
SOMETHING THAT IS 99%
MATHEMATICS, ALGEBRA
OR IS THE INTUITION
ELEMENT, THE UNQUANTIFIABLE
ELEMENT, BIGGER THAN THAT?
SO WHAT I FIND IS THAT PEOPLE
WHO ARE REALLY GOOD AT THIS
HAVE GREAT INTUITION,
THEY HAVE GREAT INSTINCT.
THEIR GUT ACTUALLY
TELLS THEM SOMETHING.
THE MATHEMATICS ARE IMPORTANT
BECAUSE THEY DEMONSTRATE
YOU UNDERSTAND THE PROBLEM.
BUT ULTIMATELY, THE
DECISION ABOUT WHETHER OR
NOT TO TAKE A GIVEN RISK
I THINK IS REALLY A
HUMAN JUDGMENT CALL
IN EVERY SENSE OF THE WORD.
THE ORIGINS OF HEDGING,
APPROPRIATELY ENOUGH,
FOR A FARMER, NOTHING
IS MORE IMPORTANT
THAN THE FUTURE
PRICE OF HIS CROP
AFTER ITS BEEN HARVESTED
AND BROUGHT TO MARKET.
BUT THAT COULD BE HIGHER OR
MUCH LOWER THAN HE EXPECTS.
A FUTURES CONTRACT ALLOWS
HIM TO PROTECT HIMSELF
BY COMMITTING A
MERCHANT TO BUY THE CROP
WHEN ITS BROUGHT TO
MARKET AT A PRICE AGREED
WHEN THE SEEDS
ARE BEING PLANTED.
THE FARMER GETS A FLOOR BELOW
WHICH THE PRICE CANT SINK,
THE MERCHANT GETS A CEILING
ABOVE WHICH IT CANT RISE.
BY SIGNING A FUTURES
CONTRACT, BOTH THE
FARMER AND THE MERCHANT
HAVE HEDGED THEIR BETS.
BOTH PARTIES ARE BETTER
OFF, AND BECAUSE OF THAT,
THE WORLD AS A WHOLE
IS MUCH BETTER OFF.
IT ENCOURAGES
CAPITAL FORMATION, IT
ENCOURAGES INVESTMENT,
IT ENCOURAGES PEOPLE TO DO
WHAT IS NEEDED TO BE DONE
TO MAKE THE WORLD
A BETTER PLACE.
WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF A
STANDARDIZED FUTURES CONTRACT,
AGREED RULES, AND AN
EFFECTIVE CLEARING HOUSE,
THE FIRST TRUE FUTURES
MARKET WAS BORN.
AND ITS BIRTHPLACE WAS
HERE IN THE WINDY CITY--
CHICAGO.
AFTER THE CITYS
FUTURES EXCHANGE WAS
ESTABLISHED IN 1874,
HEDGING COMMODITIES
BECAME STANDARD PRACTICE.
THE NEXT STEP WAS FOR A
CONDITIONAL KIND OF FUTURE
TO EVOLVE--THE OPTION.
SOME OF THIS REALLY IS
THE FINANCIAL EQUIVALENT
OF ROCKET SCIENCE,
BUT THE UNDERLYING
PRINCIPLE IS SIMPLE.
BECAUSE THEYRE DERIVED
FROM UNDERLYING ASSETS,
ALL FUTURES CONTRACTS
ARE KNOWN AS DERIVATIVES.
BUT AN EVEN SMARTER KIND OF
DERIVATIVE IS AN OPTION.
THE BUYER OF A COAL OPTION
AS THE RIGHT, SAY, TO BUY
A BARREL OF OIL FOR
$120 IN A YEARS TIME.
NOW, IF THE PRICE OF OIL
RISES TO $150 A BARREL,
THEN THE OPTION
IS IN THE MONEY,
AND A SMART GUY MAKES
A PROFIT OF $30.
BUT IF THAT DOESNT HAPPEN,
IF THE PRICE OF OIL
STAYS THE SAME OR
ACTUALLY DECLINES,
HES UNDER NO OBLIGATION
TO CARRY THROUGH THE DEAL.
ALL HE DOES IS TO WRITE OFF
THE COST OF THE OPTION ITSELF.
WELL, ITS BY BUYING
AND SELLING COMPLEX,
SMART DERIVATIVES LIKE OPTIONS
THAT KEN GRIFFIN HAS
BECOME A BILLIONAIRE.
[OVERLAPPING CHATTER]
IN THEORY, DERIVATIVES
OFFERED A NEW WAY
TO HEDGE AGAINST AN
UNCERTAIN FUTURE.
A MUCH SMARTER WAY THAN
BORING OLD INSURANCE
AND MUCH MORE PROFITABLE.
HEDGING ALSO USHERED
IN A NEW PHASE
BY SPEEDING UP THE PROCESS
OF FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION.
AND WITH THE ARRIVAL
OF THE HEDGE FUND
CAME A NEW KIND OF
ECONOMIC HIT MAN.
THE GRANDMASTER OF THE
NEW HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY
WAS GEORGE SOROS.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
SOROS BROUGHT TO GLOBAL FINANCE
A BRAND-NEW THEORY
OF ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR
THAT UNDERLINED THE
FALLIBILITY OF HUMAN NATURE
AND THE INSTABILITY
OF FINANCIAL MARKETS.
YOUR ACTIONS, YOU HAVE
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES,
SO THE OUTCOME WILL NOT
CORRESPOND TO YOUR EXPECTATIONS.
AND THAT IS THE WAY
HUMAN AFFAIRS GENERALLY WORK.
ACCORDING TO SOROS
THEORY OF REFLEXIVITY,
FINANCIAL MARKETS CANT POSSIBLY
BE PERFECTLY EFFICIENT,
MUCH LESS RATIONAL,
FOR THE SIMPLE REASON THAT
PRICES ARE JUST THE REFLECTION
OF THE IGNORANCE
AND THE BIASES,
MOSTLY COMPLETELY IRRATIONAL,
OF MILLIONS OF INVESTORS.
IN SOROS EYES, MARKETS
ARE BOUND TO GO THROUGH
CYCLES OF BOOM AND BUST
AS SURELY AS THE
HUMAN TEMPERAMENT
IS PRONE TO BOUTS OF
EUPHORIA AND DESPONDENCY.
SOROS QUANTUM FUND
HAD MADE MILLIONS
FROM SHORT SELLING,
A TYPE OF DEALING WHICH
BORROWS STOCKS OR CURRENCIES
AND SELLS THEM FOR
FUTURE DELIVERY
ON THE CALCULATION THAT
THEYLL GO DOWN IN VALUE.
HIS BIGGEST COUPS CAME FROM
BEING RIGHT ABOUT LOSERS,
NOT WINNERS, AND THE
GREATEST OF THESE
WAS AMONG THE MOST
MOMENTOUS SPECULATIVE HITS
IN ALL FINANCIAL HISTORY.
ON SEPTEMBER THE 16TH, 1992,
WITH THE BRITISH
POUND IN BIG TROUBLE,
I WATCHED AS SOROS
PUT OUT A CONTRACT ON
THE BANK OF ENGLAND.
I BECAME CONVINCED THAT
SPECULATORS LIKE SOROS
WERE BOUND TO WIN IF IT
CAME TO A STRAIGHT SHOWDOWN
WITH THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS A MATTER OF
SIMPLE ARITHMETIC.
A TRILLION DOLLARS OF
CURRENCY TRADED EVERY DAY
ON FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS
AGAINST THE MEAGER HARD CURRENCY
RESERVES OF THE U.K. TREASURY.
AT THAT TIME, THE BRITISH
POUND WAS TIGHTLY LINKED
TO THE GERMAN MARK
THROUGH THE E.R.M.,
THE EUROPEAN EXCHANGE
RATE MECHANISM.
AS GERMAN INTEREST RATES ROSE
IN THE WAKE OF THAT COUNTRYS
HUGELY EXPENSIVE REUNIFICATION,
BRITAINS RATE HAD TO RISE, TOO,
HURTING HOMEOWNERS
AND BUSINESSES.
SOROS CALCULATED THAT THE
BRITISH CHANCELLOR NORMAN LAMONT
WOULD BE FORCED TO
WITHDRAW FROM THE E.R.M.
AND DEVALUE THE POUND.
IT WAS THE BIGGEST
BET OF SOROS LIFE.
SO SURE WAS HE THAT
THE POUND WOULD DROP
THAT HE BET $10 BILLION.
MORE THAN THE ENTIRE
CAPITAL OF HIS FUND.
THE RISK-REWARD WAS
DISPROPORTIONATE,
AND THEREFORE, IT SEEMS
LIKE A GOOD SPECULATION
OR INVESTMENT, IF YOU LIKE,
IN SHORTING THE POUND.
I WAS EQUALLY CONVINCED
THAT STERLING WOULD
HAVE TO BE DEVALUED,
THOUGH ALL I HAD TO
BET WAS MY CREDIBILITY.
THAT EVENING, I
HEADED TO THE OPERA
TO SEE VERDIS THE
FORCE OF DESTINY.
IT PROVED EXCEEDINGLY
APPROPRIATE.
AT THE INTERVAL, THEY ANNOUNCED
THAT CHANCELLOR NORMAN LAMONT
HAD APPEARED IN THERE, IN
THE TREASURY COURTYARD,
TO SAY THAT BRITAIN WAS
WITHDRAWING FROM THE E.R.M.
HOW WE ALL CHEERED.
TODAY HAS BEEN AN
EXTREMELY DIFFICULT
AND TURBULENT DAY.
MASSIVE SPECULATIVE FLOWS
HAVE CONTINUED TO DISRUPT
THE FUNCTIONING OF THE
EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM.
SOROS MADE A BILLION
DOLLARS THAT DAY.
AND THAT WAS ONLY 40% OF
HIS FUNDS ANNUAL PROFITS.
DO YOU FEEL OR DID YOU
FEEL A SENSE OF TRIUMPH
WHEN YOUR PROPHESY CAME TRUE
AND THE BET PAID OFF HUGELY?
OF COURSE. IT WAS LIKE WHEN
YOURE BETTING AND YOU WIN,
NATURALLY, YOU HAVE
THAT SATISFACTION
AND ALSO THE PROFIT.
IN THE PAST DECADE, THE
TRADE IN DERIVATIVES
BY HEDGE FUNDS LIKE SOROS
HAS SEEMED TO TAKE OVER
THE WORLD OF FINANCE.
BY THE END OF 2007,
THE NOTIONAL VALUE OF ALL
DERIVATIVES CONTRACTS
REACHED A STAGGERING
$596 TRILLION.
THATS 43 TIMES THE SIZE
OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY.
THERE ARE TREMENDOUS
ECONOMIC BENEFITS
FOR PEOPLE THAT WORK HERE.
$20 BILLION IN THE HANDS
OF A THOUSAND PEOPLE
IS REALLY A
21ST-CENTURY PHENOMENA.
THIS NEVER HAPPENED
50 YEARS AGO.
YET AS MANY HAVE DISCOVERED
TO THEIR GREAT COST RECENTLY,
THERE ARE DOWNSIDES
TO HEDGING, TOO.
WHEN BILLIONAIRE
INVESTOR WARREN BUFFET
DESCRIBED DERIVATIVES
AS FINANCIAL WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION,
HE ALL BUT PROPHESIED
THE DOWNFALL
OF AMERICAN
INSURANCE GIANT AIG,
WHOSE EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS
ARE THERE BEHIND ME,
BROUGHT LOW, NOT BY SELLING
INSURANCE POLICIES,
BUT BY SELLING DERIVATIVES
THAT BLEW UP IN ITS FACE.
OUR BASIC HUMAN URGE TO
PROTECT OURSELVES AGAINST RISK
HAS PROVED FRUSTRATINGLY
DIFFICULT TO SATISFY.
INSURANCE COMPANIES LET US DOWN.
WELFARE STATES SINK
INTO INSOLVENCY.
AND DERIVATIVES TURN OUT TO
BE A DOUBLE-EDGE WEAPON, TOO.
[GUNSHOT]
AND SO FOR MANY FAMILIES,
PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE
NOW TAKES ONE VERY SIMPLE FORM--
AN INVESTMENT IN A HOUSE,
THE VALUE OF WHICH IS
SUPPOSED TO KEEP GOING UP
UNTIL THE DAY THE
BREADWINNERS NEED TO RETIRE.
IF THE PENSION PLAN
FALLS SHORT, NEVER MIND.
THERES ALWAYS HOME SWEET HOME.
ENCOURAGING HOME
OWNERSHIP MAY WELL CREATE
A POLITICAL CONSTITUENCY
FOR CAPITALISM,
BUT IT ALSO DISTORTS
THE CAPITAL MARKET
BY PERSUADING PEOPLE
TO BET THE HOUSE
ON, WELL, THE HOUSE.
PEOPLE NEED TO BORROW
MONEY, OF COURSE,
TO START UP BUSINESSES OR
TO BUY EXPENSIVE ASSETS,
BUT IT SEEMS DANGEROUS TO LURE
THEM INTO STAKING EVERYTHING
ON THE FAR-FROM-RISK-FREE
PROPERTY MARKET.
FROM BUCKINGHAMSHIRE TO
BOLIVIA TO BONNY SCOTLAND,
THE KEY IS TO STRIKE
THE RIGHT BALANCE
BETWEEN DEBT AND INCOME.
NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,
ILL BE SHOWING HOW THE
ENTIRE WORLD ECONOMY
MANAGED TO GET THAT
BALANCE PERILOUSLY WRONG.
NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,
AMERICANS KNOW THAT
THERES NO PLACE LIKE HOME,
EVEN IF ALL THE HOMES
ARE RATHER SIMILAR.
IS HOME OWNERSHIP THE PATH
TO FINANCIAL SECURITY?
THE ROOSEVELT ADMINISTRATION
PIONEERED THE IDEA
OF A PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY.
OR IS IT THE ROAD TO RUIN?
A SMALL TREMOR IN AMERICAS
VERY OWN REAL ESTATE MARKET
WOULD CAUSE A FINANCIAL
EARTHQUAKE ALL AROUND THE WORLD.
THE ASCENT OF MONEY,
A FINANCIAL HISTORY
OF THE WORLD.
TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
AND WATCH THE FILM, VISIT...
CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE
BY FRIENDS OF NCI
FUNDING FOR THE
ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
MY IDEA WILL BRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.
AND BY...